+++
title = 'What Is Going On With Short Form Video?'
date = 2024-08-05T18:08:09-04:00
draft = true
+++

Entertainment is expressed through many different mediums. One of the mediums that I want to focus on today is algorithmically recommended short form video. I will break down this medium so we have a sturdy definition before continuing. Starting with short form video, I will define this as content which is less than 5 minutes in length. Although the upperbound is set at 5 minutes, typical clips may be as short as 5 seconds. I'll define algorithmically recommended as content which is presented to the user without their explict search or feedback. It often uses gathered usage analytics to curate its recommendations. Altogether my definition is as follows:

> Algorithmically Recommended Short Form Video (SFV):
> Video clips no longer than 5 minutes long that are recommended using user analytics and presented to the user without any explict search.

SFV content has seemed to find its way into most of our social media and content applications. Facebook, Youtube, Instagram, Tiktok, Snapchat, X (Twitter), Reddit all have algorithmically recommended short form video as a feature. Tiktok is the perfect example of this type of experience. A user opens the app and is immediately met with full screen video playing. There is no prompt, search, or selection required. The user opens the app and the videos begin to play. Users don't come in with an express intention of knowing what they want to watch. They defer their decision to the algorithm which serves the user as soon as they enter. This is akin to a customer sitting down at a resturant and letting the chef pick their meal. There is a sense of deference with which the user treats their time and attention. They trust that the algorithm will know best what to show them. Recommendation algorithms have been around for many years, and although they have increased in their effectiveness with new compute resources this improvement alone does not explain the sudden sky-rocketed popularity of algorithmic content. The missing ingredient was the ideal medium for algorithmic content, short form video. Short form video is ideal for a few different reasons.

1. Short form content doesn't require much time investment. When we are making choices over how to spend long portions of our time (20 mins, 2 hours etc.) we often feel this choice weigh heavily on us. The upfront cost of the singular choice seems too large for us to defer entirely to an algorithm. This is partially why algorithms in Netflix, HBO Max and Long-Form Youtube feel weaker to us. Instead, when an algorithm recommends a piece of video that is 10 seconds long we are willing to trust it since the investment is lower. The irony of this, of course, is that we on total end up spending significant periods of time watching short form video. Time which can add up to be longer than a 2 hour film. We don't register it as such because each piece of content is iterative with the freedom to quit or continue many times per minute.

2. Short form content increases the amount of behavioral signals sent per hour. When you watch an hour long netflix show, you provide to netflix that you watched that show to completion (presumably meaning you liked it). Perhaps you watched another episode after sending a signal that you liked it enough to watch the next episode. This means that over the course of two hours you provided netflix about 2 or 3 data points about your entertainment preferences. Compared with short form video in the same period of time you provide hundreds of signals over hundreds of videos. For each short video it can collect watch time, if you "hearted" the video, read the comments, followed the creator, clicked on the creators page and which video you watched next. This is just a few of the common-sense signals collected but there may be many more considered like time of day, geo-location, profile info like age and gender. Within an hour of watching short form video you provide the recommendation algorithm an incredible amount of data about what you watch and don't watch. This allows it to very quickly profile you and present content it knows you will like.
